---

### On Counseling
I think this post would be best prefaced by a short contemplation of counseling (or psychotherapy), and its relatively newfound role in society, and recently my marriage. In one of my wife and I's favorite shows to watch together, "The Office" (US), there are two characters, Jim Halpert and Pam Beesly. They share a whimsical friendship over the first few seasons, with a distinct flavor of romantic interest. Somewhere around season 8 of the show, we find them now married, and with a few children. Jim is pursuing a new and uncertain job, in a different city, creating stress and pressure on their relationship. At one point, Jim walks over to another character, Toby (who has been divorced since the beginning of the show), and asks him "I was wondering if you ever did any couple’s counseling?" Toby responds, "Oh, sure, lots of times. Yeah. Wait, you and Pam aren’t in couple’s counseling, are you? Oh, God." To which Jim replies, "No, no, no, no, no. Uh, we’re just starting couple’s counseling. Uh, which doesn’t sound any better."

The implication of this exchange is not hard to deduce. If you're in couples counseling, then your relationship must be on the rocks, so to speak. This perception, while not universal, I've found to be quite common. I even see it within my past self. Thinking back on the stories I would hear growing up about people, or couples, in counseling, they were nearly always conveyed with hushed tones and an air of sadness or pity. "Those people must be really messed up to go pay somebody to listen to their problems for an hour a week," I thought. The irony is not lost on me, now.

However, it's exactly this perception that I now want to challenge. Consider, if you see somebody with a personal trainer working out at the gym, what do you think? I'd imagine a line similar to, "Good for them. They're trying to take care of themselves." When you hear somebody is going to see a counselor or therapist, why shouldn't the same thought be true? In the same way that you must work and put your body through pain in order to maintain good physical shape, the care of your emotional and mental state requires time, effort, and often the endurance of pain. Good mental and emotional health comes with effort. Furthermore, the subject, in my opinion, is more difficult to spelunk on your own than physical fitness. Which, in my wife and I's case, has led us to visit a licensed counselor near our home together, every other week. 

### Prior Sessions
The Thursday prior was the fourth such time Noelle and I sat down (this time, virtually) with our counselor. Each of the first three sessions I had intended to reflect on, in writing, and in greater detail. However, for the purposes of this post, a more succinct summary must suffice. 

The first session, in a word, was uncomfortable. Noelle and I spent the majority of the time talking through our present difficulties in communicating with and understanding the other. For my part, I had a tendency to hoard time alone, and to make myself non-dependent on people and things. It stymied Noelle's empathy, and frustrated her deeply. I went on to think through this tendency, and observed how I would often approach panic, if I believed I would not get enough time alone. I also spent a good portion of time describing my childhood, which I remember fondly. As I shared, Alice (our counselor), commented something like, "It sounds like you believe that you're only going to receive care (of the emotional variety) from yourself. If that is true, it certainly makes sense why you would start to panic if the time alone might not be coming, because then the care isn't coming either." At the time, I thought it was merely a good insight. I think of my alone time as my way of caring for myself. If I think it's not coming, I get spooked. Anyhow, the truly uncomfortable part was when Alice asked me to turn to Noelle and share how I felt when I thought I wouldn't receive this care, from myself or others. After a few false starts, she finally coaxed out something like, "Vulnerable, scared." Man, I don't think I'd felt so uncomfortable since the episode of "The Office" where Michael outed Oscar and then tried to resolve the problem in the conference room. She asked me to share this feeling with Noelle (yikes), and then for Noelle to respond to that feeling (yikes).

It's even uncomfortable to write about. 

The sessions after followed a similar pattern. Noelle and I would share either a recent conflict or what we'd been experiencing generally in the two weeks past, and Alice would unpack each emotion from the experiences, in order, and ask us to share them with each other, and then respond. The purpose, I believe, was to give each emotion space to heal by sharing it, and allowing the other to empathize. Boy, do I not enjoy that process. The first few sessions, I found myself without even a proper vocabulary for the relevant emotions. It's improved since, if only slightly. In some of the sessions, we spent more time exploring my tendency for self-care, and my hesitation to be vulnerable. I don't think anything became exceptionally clear for me, however, until last Thursday.

### Reconciling Conflicts
Noelle and I, the prior week, had experienced a bit of a culmination of some strong emotions on each of our parts. It started Thursday evening, with my approaching Noelle, seeking reconciliation. She was clearly upset, and though I was experiencing similar emotions, I asked her what she was feeling and patiently listened. For an hour or so, she described how she was upset with my tendency to not consider doing things together (like eating meals). She felt forgotten, and not thought-of. It was painful to hear, and there was truth in her words, however angry. In the moment, though, I desired not to absorb and reconcile her words, but to retaliate. In what I legitimately can only credit to the presence of the Spirit, I absorbed her words and her hurt with tenderness and patience, and we were reconciled to great intimacy.

The next morning, I woke up, very much grateful for the relational healing of the prior night, but still feeling not quite well. We enjoyed a shared breakfast early, good humor throughout the day, and a longer walk through the park in the afternoon. By the evening, however, I found myself bubbling up with the frustrations I had yet to share. By dinner, I was entirely silent, and Noelle knew something wasn't right. After we ate, my feelings finally made themselves known. I raised my voice, not for the first time, but one of the very few in our four plus years together. I gesticulated somewhat dramatically, and in the end I was panting and staring at my wife, waiting for her response. I have a humorous image in my head of myself frothing at the mouth and bulging at the eyes, though I don't believe that is quite what she saw. She wore a ghost of a smile, and said slowly, "I understand why you feel that way." She continued by acknowledging each of my frustrations, lending to them the legitimacy of a second voice. I balked at the anticlimax. _That's it?_, I thought. I felt heard, and known. The emotions were healed, and we were well and truly reconciled.

After sharing this with Alice, we explored one of the more interesting parts of the story. Why didn't I share my emotions the night before? Why did I wait until the following day, and even then, only share them when they would no longer be contained? Here lies the rub.

### Why wait?
There is a good argument to be made that my wife was not in a good place to hear what I had to share on Thursday evening, and that it was wise to wait until a later time to speak my feelings. I made this argument during our time with Alice. I still believe its merit. Yet, it is not the entire truth. If that was entirely true, why would I have waited the entire day following before sharing? Why wouldn't I share the next morning after breakfast? The truth is, I hadn't planned on sharing. In my head, I expected to be able to go off to a quiet place (physically or mentally), resolve these feelings on my own (perhaps during prayer), and then return to my wife. This pattern, I now recognize, is paramount to my strategy for moving through the world. I quite enjoy helping care for others (by words or actions), and will gladly care for my wife, but when it comes my turn, I withdraw to a quiet place to care for myself. 

Contemplating it now, I would be curious to know where this experience might be common, perhaps among type "Five"s in particular? Anyhow, there is the primary reason why I didn't plan on sharing my emotion with my wife before it overwhelmed me. Subconsciously, I expected to care for myself. Before marriage, there was always plenty of time to retreat into my own physical or mental space, and tend to whatever hurt. In marriage, and by its very design, I must depend on my spouse for part of my care. Interestingly, I find it incredibly difficult to do. Why?

### Being Afraid
I'm probably most surprised by this, of all the conclusions and revelations of the past three months, but the truth is, I'm afraid. If I make myself vulnerable to care, then inherently I make myself vulnerable to hurt. What happens if I open myself to this care, and instead receive judgement, or condemnation, or indifference? My wife has the greatest power of words over me of any human on the planet. Her ideas and opinions matter more to me than any other individual. Therefore, she has a powerful ability to both raise me up, and tear me down, with her words. This idea is not new. I preached it myself to anybody who would listen soon after I first read it in Tim Keller's, "The Meaning of Marriage". However, now is the first time that I'm seeing real implications in my life. If I expose myself, I'm not just exposing myself to hurt, but the most severe kind of hurt available.

I'm afraid of that hurt. I'm afraid. In my marriage, I fear the disapproval of my wife, because it would make me think I've failed as a husband. In my workplace, I fear the disapproval of my peers, because then I would think I've failed as a professional. Familially, I fear the disapproval of my parents, because it would mean I've failed as a son. Socially, I fear the disapproval of my friends, because I want to believe I'm a good human. In nearly all things, I fear not being (or having) enough. 

### Preaching to my Soul
Psalms 42:11 says, "Why are you cast down, o my soul, and why are you in turmoil within me? Hope in God; for I shall again praise him, my salvation and my God." The psalmist is depressed. His soul is cast down, and in turmoil within him. Yet, his response is not to wallow, but to preach to his soul. I will follow the same model. I fear the condemnation of the people I respect and admire. Namely, my wife, my parents, my coworkers, and my friends. But, the Person whom I respect and admire the most has no condemnation for me, and He embraced me despite the many reasons not to. He cherishes me, and while He does not waver in speaking Truth when I do wrong, He is always for me. Furthermore, I know His commitment is set in stone. Nothing I do will turn him away from me. I am spoken for. My confidence comes not from the words of others, but from His words. He who sees clearly my brokenness, yet names me his son.

It will likely take a lifetime for the truth of the paragraph above to move from a logical understanding in my mind to a deep-seated belief of my heart. But in the face of this Truth, what have I to fear from the words of others?
