---

### The Problem of Stewardship
I've [written before about money](https://thisgoodendeavor.com/fundamental-money). The purpose of that post could be summarized, "To communicate, in a nutshell, how to maximize personal wealth." While this is an incredibly pragmatic goal, it is, I think, incomplete. Actually, it would be more correct of me to say not that it is incomplete, rather, it is but one part of a greater whole. 

We live in an age where, for the majority of the population (in first world countries), the primary objective of living is not _merely_ survival. What this means in financial terms is that most individuals earn more money than is sufficient to provide for themselves food, shelter, and clothing. Which presents an obvious question, "How should they use the surplus?"

As a Christian, I think this question gets much more interesting to consider. The Bible gives us more than two _thousand_ verses on the subject of money. A fact often referenced on Sunday morning, if a pastor is feeling bold enough to preach truthfully on the subject. Yet, how much does the average Christian actually know about the biblical Truth of financial stewardship? How often in your closest Christian friendships do you broach the subject? Despite being perhaps the most universal responsibility of a Christian (but for the great commission, and to walk humbly with our God), it remains one of the most taboo topics of conversation. There are few more practical subjects to learn for a Christian, and few so infrequently discussed.

Before delving into the truth of biblical stewardship, I want to answer the question, "Why?" Why does it really matter how I, as an ambassador for Christ, use the money in my possession? Why do I need to think deeply into this subject, and pursue the biblical Truth? A good friend of mine asked me the same just a few days ago, and before all else, it deserves a good and thorough answer.

### Why Do I Care?
I would assert two reasons for this subject's paramount importance in the life of a Christian. First, a Christian's attitude towards (and use of) money is a _wildly_ effective aspect of his or her witness. American culture, and the culture of the world, views money chiefly as a means for acquisition of power, pride, and possessions. It is considered normal (and ethically permissed) to use the overwhelming majority of money you earn for your own desires and means. 

A biblically-founded perspective on money is so antithetical to the world's, that it perplexes the average person to see a Christian using money the way God intends us to. There are few more powerful ways to share the character of God than by allowing others to observe your biblical use of money (if the _reason_ for allowing others to observe is not to [bolster your own self-righteousness](https://biblehub.com/matthew/6-3.htm)). 

How better create opportunities for meaningful conversation about the ways in which God has changed your heart, than to counter the culture when it comes to money? When you demonstrate by your actions that money has no hold on your heart (in the way it does for most), you create tremendous space in peoples' hearts and minds for hearing _why_ it has no hold (and therefore, hearing the Gospel). So, first, to know and live biblical stewardship is a wonderful aid in the Christian's endeavor to share Christ. 

Second, acting out biblical stewardship ensures (repeatedly) you are not subconsciously worshipping a counterfeit god. There are many places a man or woman can seek a sense of identity, value, and security. Romantic relationships are one. Professional success is another. Chief among these is the accrual of money. By accumulating wealth, an individual can find a sense of accomplishment, pride, security, and self-worth. For a Christian this is subtly, but incredibly, dangerous. To allow anything to take God's place as your providence, security, and identity is perhaps the most insidious of evils. 

This is what the bible calls an idol. Something or someone that assumes a role in your life which ought to be filled by God. Do you garner a greater sense of security from your net worth than from knowing God's sovereignty, power, and goodness? Do you derive your self-worth more from your socioeconomic status than from Christ calling you, by name, into a relationship with himself? 

The simplest way to reveal the answers to these questions is to look at your use of money ([Matthew 6:21](https://biblehub.com/james/1-17.htm)). Is it difficult to think about giving a full tithe? Do you budget more for luxuries and comfort than for serving the lost and least? Hunting down and slaying idols is a difficult, but crucial, task in a Christian's life. Understanding the truth of biblical stewardship can aid you much in this effort, and lead you to a more honest and more intimate relationship with God. 

## The Truth of Stewardship
If you think back to grade school, you probably remember the social ecosystem that existed. There were different cliques; the "popular kids", the "athletes", the "nerds", etc. These groups were roughly ordered hierarchichally, each afforded some social status according to their ranking. Do you recall looking forward to graduation, and leaving that world behind? It is a great irony, certainly, to find ourselves, as adults, in quite similar circumstances. Yet, now the hierarchy is a function of the money you make, and its derivatives (your vocation, your residence, your possessions, your hobbies). In both cases, the underlying assumption is that, because you have more of a given thing than someone else (talent, beauty, achievement, money), you have _earned_ the social status you're afforded. This assumption still underlies much of our thinking today. If you make more money than someone else, you're likely to consider yourself superior to them (often implicitly). Conversely, if you make less, you're likely to feel inferior, compelled to compensate for your difference in economic status by asserting some other form of superiority (e.g. moral). 

The biblical truth, however, is a stark contrast. The bible says that we, as individuals, haven't done anything to earn what we have ([James 1:17](https://biblehub.com/james/1-17.htm)). Indeed, there is nothing we "own" that truly belongs to us, either ([Psalms 24:1](https://biblehub.com/psalms/24-1.htm)). It is simple to accept this truth for those traits we are born with: physical appearance, talent, intelligence. Traits which are, of course, inherited. It becomes more difficult to accept this truth when we consider the fruit of those gifts. Is it not easy to think, "I worked hard to get where I am!"? My question for folks who make that assertion would be, where did your work ethic come from? Who gave you the self control you used to study and practice so diligently? Ultimately, you were knitted together in the womb by your Creator. Every good and perfect gift is from Him. We have no claim to every good and perfect gift He has given us, even to life itself.

If all good things are ultimately given to us by God, what does that make us? Stewards. To steward means to ["manage or look after (another's property)"](https://www.google.com/search?q=steward). God has trusted us with the responsibility of managing the gifts he has given. These gifts are inclusive of, but not limited to, the paychecks we receive. Furthermore, if the money in the paycheck we receive is not ours, but His, then our responsibility is not simply to give God his portion (through charity or the like), but to honor God with how we manage every penny. 

Herein lies the chief challenge of the Christian, when it comes to money. How do they honor God with every penny of the money he has entrusted them? For the purposes of this post, let's call this the "Question".



## In the Abstract
A helpful place to start is to consider the question, "What can be done with money?" If you were to open your wallet, billfold, or purse, and find a one hundred dollar bill, what would you do with it? Depending on where you are, one hundred dollars could be exchanged for nice clothing. Or, perhaps, it could buy you (and a friend, or friends) a good meal at that restaurant you're particularly fond of. Maybe you've had your eye on a nice item for your home. All of these examples are instances of one use of money, in the abstract. Namely, spending. 

What else could you do with that bill? You might think, "I want to buy a house someday", or "I'd like buy a new car soon", or "I ought to keep this in case my car breaks down", and decide to go put that money in the bank. Similarly, you might think, "I want to retire comfortably", or "I want to build wealth", and decide to go invest it. In either case, you're deferring the actual consumption of the money to a later date. Namely, saving. 

You might be a rather charitable chap, and decide instead to take your one hundred dollars and donate it to the local soup kitchen, or animal shelter, or youth center. Or perhaps you know a friend or family member who could really use a particular item, and you decide to put your money toward that gift. Both ideas are instances of the final use of money, in the abstract. Namely, giving.

There are thousands of ways to consume money, but, ultimately, all of those ways can be rolled up into one (or more) of these three categories. Moreover, it is far more simple (though far from simple) to answer the Question when we consider these three uses individually. It is the nature of many biblical truths that to abide by them is to adhere to guiding principles, moreso than to follow specific patterns of behavior. For example, we are told the greatest command is to love God and love others ([Matthew 22:37-39](https://biblehub.com/esv/matthew/22.htm)). However, we're not told precisely _how_ to do that in every circumstance. Instead, we're given principles like "count others more significant than yourselves" ([Phillipians 2:3](https://biblehub.com/philippians/2-3.htm)) and "love is patient, love is kind..." ([1 Corinthians 13:4-7](https://biblehub.com/esv/1_corinthians/13.htm)). 

In answering the Question with scripture, we will often find ourselves met with principles of a similar form. For this reason, it's worth stating now that you will not find below an assertion such as, "You ought to allot 20% of your income to saving, 20% to giving, 40% to necessities, and 20% to discretionary spending". Instead, you will find principles, and principled questions, to guide you in stewardship. 

### Spending
This use of money, at first blush, would appear to be the most challenging. Ought the Christian spend money on anything other than bare necessities? The Apostle Paul, perhaps the most influential Christian leader in history, behind Jesus, lived an ascetic lifestyle, frequently working with his own hands to pay for necessities while he was ministering ((2 Thessalonians 3:8)[https://biblehub.com/2_thessalonians/3-8.htm]). Many other famous Christian leaders lived, or live, similarly. However, we're also given the example of David in the books of Samuel, a man who was a king (and clearly indulged in pleasures his wealth afforded him), but also claimed by God as a man after his own heart ([1 Samuel 13:14](https://biblehub.com/1_samuel/13-14.htm)). Likewise, we have the example of Job. An incredibly wealthy man, of whom God says, "there is none like him on the earth, a blameless and upright man, who fears God and turns away from evil" ([Job 1:8](https://biblehub.com/job/1-8.htm)). What, then, are we to make of wealth and of spending money?

### Saving
> Do not lay up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy and where thieves break in and steal, but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys and where thieves do not break in and steal. For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also. [Matthew 6:19-21](https://biblehub.com/esv/matthew/6.htm)

> Parable of the talents [Matthew 25:14-30](https://biblehub.com/esv/matthew/25.htm)

> Joseph and the Famine [Genesis 41](https://biblehub.com/esv/genesis/41.htm)

### Giving
talked about the most, but often in unhelpful ways. the question isn't "what's the least I can give with which God would be satisfied?", but is "how do I honor God with my giving?" having relationships with the recipients. giving in ways that actually help honor God's design for people as image-bearers. 
