---

## "You can do it. We can help."
When I graduated college at 21 (it's already been four years?) I accepted a job offer with The Home Depot as a Software Engineer. I spent the early days of my time there writing code with a Senior Software Engineer by the name of Don. Don, in an endearing way, was a crotchety old man. He was kind (though sometimes non-obviously), and went out of his way to introduce me to his vast network of coworkers within THD. He also spent a lot of time helping me learn my way around life as an adult. How do I open a new bank account? How should I manage a budget? What should I do for my honeymoon? Don was great, and I miss Don.

The team I worked on consisted of a few other folks; another senior engineer, a quality engineer, and a user experience designer. Over the course of the first year, we developed a web application to help manage and track the $10b in inventory that was passed around between distribution centers and stores each year. For the first six months of that year, I really loved the work. Each day I became measurably more knowledgable and skillful as an engineer, and it was incredibly gratifying. It did become apparent though, as I neared the end of my first year,a few aspects of the work environment were particularly painful for me. There wasn't an even distribution of responsibility among the team. I was disproportionately responsible for the software being delivered (during the week I was away for my honeymoon, nothing was accomplished), yet I wasn't disproportionately rewarded.

I wrote about this in some more detail in my [post about my first two years as a software engineer](https://thisgoodendeavor.com/what-i-learned-in-my-first-two-years), but there are a couple more aspects of this experience I want to explore. First, what was it that I _really_ desired to be true of my work environment? Second, how did I (if at all) end up in a role which possessed those qualities?

### The Dream Job
You know, I actually am feeling some amount of self-loathing for the title of this section. I don't think a "dream" job, or "dream" anything, exists. We live in a world corrupted by sin, and are a broken people. In such a world, I don't think it's _possible_ for a "dream" anything to exist. At least, if we define dream as, "characterized by perfect fulfillment and joy". Any work, any marriage, any hobby, or any entertainment is going to be incomplete in its ability to provide joy and satisfaction, given the human condition. So, when I title this section "The Dream Job", what I really intend to communicate is, "a role which is as satisfying and joyful an experience as can be had, in the presence of our fallen nature."

While I was still at The Home Depot, I thought deeply into what it was that was greatly unsatisfying about the current role. It was more helpful to frame the internal dialogue (and later, this and other external dialogue) in the context of, "What traits would make a role truly satisfying (acknowledging that no role is perfect)?" In that vein, it was easy to take the aspects of my role at The Home Depot with which I was most frustrated, and reverse engineer what I was earnestly looking for.

#### A Meritocracy
I want the level of responsibility, recognition, compensation, and respect in my workplace to be a function _almost_ solely of an individual's merit (the "almost" is crucial here, and I'll revisit its meaning soon). I want to be led by folks who are talented at the leadership of people. I want to be instructed in engineering disciplines by someone who is more skilled in them than I. I want to work alongside individuals who _achieved_ their current role, and are earning their title every day. I want to look around and think, "each person I work with has a skill or trait which I admire, and would like to emulate in my own work or person."

But, the "almost". All of this does not contradict the fact I, and my coworkers, are human. Perfection is not reasonable to expect. We will make mistakes (frequently). There should, and will be, grace for those mistakes. We should help to compensate for each others' weaknesses, and not harbor judgement if someone is less skilled in a given area than we are. However, I do expect all of us to be striving for excellence, together. I do expect all of us to be pulling our weight each week, knowing that some weeks will be heavier than others, and that in some seasons we'll pull a disproportionate amount of weight in order to help each other along. All said, I want merit (how much value a person contributes to the team/company) to be held in high regard, and I want evidence of this belief to be apparent in each individual's responsibility, recognition, compensation, and respect. This perspective is relatively strong (and oft-unpopular), I've found, and it's very difficult (for me) to work in an environment where that idea is not shared.

#### A Kindred Spirit
A related desire, I want my belief in the pursuit of excellence in each person's craft to be shared by my coworkers. We are to serve our work as if for God, and not for people. Therefore, I desire to be the best I can be in my discipline. I aspire to be the best teammate I can be by strengthening relationships, loving my teammates, solving the highest value problems, and delivering the best possible quality software. I want to reflect God's character of wisdom, knowledge, and grace through the way I interact with my coworkers, and through the code I write. I don't expect all of my coworkers to share the same _why_, but I crave they would share this pursuit of excellence (both in technical skill, and interpersonal skill). Important to note, it's much more difficult to pursue this kind of ability without the aid of one who is farther along the path, somebody who can help you to grow much faster than you could on your own.

#### Mentorship
At The Home Depot, unfortunately, there wasn't a more senior engineer (on my team, or in the department) to me who was willing and able, to help me grow in this manner. I long to be able to look at the engineers on my team and think, "I have something to learn from each of you". More specifically, I greatly desire that one of those engineers would be particularly tasked with aiding in my growth as a team member. This would mean a reasonable amount of time each week, in whatever form it may take, is spent on guiding and helping me along a path of growth. On the face of it, this may sound self-interested (and, granted, to some degree it is), but I would broadly correct that notion by saying this, I also want to be particularly tasked with aiding the growth of less-experienced teammates than I. It is deeply satisfying to both learn from others, and to help pass on understanding, knowledge, or skills to younger engineers. So, in summation, I want a work culture which, among other things, is oriented around the growth of their employees, and leverages mentorship as one powerful tool to achieve it.

Looking at them now, I think these three ideas boil down to something relatively simple, a work culture that holds excellence in high esteem. If a work culture highly values the ability to do, and the doing of, great work, then the three ideas above will flow naturally forth. Merit will be respected and rewarded, the hiring process will naturally attract individuals who pursue excellence, and growth (and mentorship) will be an integral part of daily life.

For completeness, it must be said that I believe a culture centered around this kind of excellence would be a miserable place to be, if and only if there was no grace. Grace, here, means acceptance and forgiveness of failure. The workplace should have grace for individuals as they go through seasons of less productivity and growth (such seasons will come). The workplace also should be a safe place to, and encourage, even, making mistakes. Without feeling safe to make mistakes, creativity will be stifled, and there will be little trust between employee and employer. That trust is _crucial_ to an environment in which employees can thrive. I won't go into depth describing every value I believe a workplace should hold, but suffice to say valuing excellence, without grace and trust, could be perilous.

### A Rough Landing
Having quantified my "dream" job (in part), we can continue the story of the end of my time at The Home Depot. After my first year at THD, I was feeling frustrated with my employer, so I spent a healthy chunk of time honing my skills and seeking employment opportunities elsewhere. During this time, I participated in a few online coding competitions, and after one of them received emails of interest from both Google and Palantir. I interviewed at each, and received an offer from Palantir in July (I think) of 2018. The offer was for the role of Forward Deployed Engineer, at Palantir's office in Washington, D.C. Admittedly, I felt some amount of elation for receiving the offer. By all accounts, it was an achievement in itself. Now, though, Noelle and I faced a challenging decision. Do we leave the community we just began to connect with in Atlanta to start an entirely new role, with no promise of whether I would enjoy the job (or it would be a meatgrinder), no promise of Noelle finding a new position nearby, and no promise of being able to connect to new community? We prayed hard for several weeks. We sought counsel from individuals and couples whom we trusted deeply. Eventually, we had reasonable confidence that God's will was for us to go. So we waited until the timing made sense, quit our jobs, and moved to D.C.

I'll admit, for reasons totally unrelated to my work, this move was difficult. Noelle experienced some deep pain in leaving some close friends she made in Atlanta, and also felt quite uncomfortable in the new city. The culture was vastly different than any place we had lived before. It was wealthy, posh, and in large part image-oriented. It just didn't feel like we fit in. However, I digress. This post is not about our thoughts on Washington, D.C., nor is it a commentary on urban culture in the United States.

Forward Deployed Engineer. I read that title before I started the job and thought, "Interesting. I wonder how that's different from 'Software Engineer'?" During the interview process, I asked many questions about the role. What kind of technology stack would I be developing on? What type of software development life cycle would I be a part of? The answer I received was, invariably, "It depends." From my perspective, the specific answers to those questions didn't matter much, only that I'd be developing software alongside talented engineers. It turns out, "it depends" was a bit misleading.

In my first two weeks of onboarding, I quickly realized that the role was not what I had been sold. I wouldn't be developing software (full time), I'd be helping clients implement the software that other engineers developed. I'll admit, I didn't take this well. I was angry at Palantir for what, at best, was poor communication about the role I accepted. I was also deeply unsettled, because all of this passion for software development I had been nurturing in the last two years suddenly had no place to go. I couldn't fathom working daily in a role where I wasn't constantly improving my skills and value as a software engineer. I would spend time, after work, developing personal software projects, because I _needed_ to feel like I was growing. After one month, I was strongly considering looking for a new role in the area. I found myself thinking, why did God point us at this job? It wasn't even the type of role I wanted to be in. Furthermore, how could he have guided us in this direction, knowing what lie ahead?

I suppose my question for you now is, do you see it?

#### A Hidden Idol
I stayed in the role, due in no small part to empathy and help from the technical lead on my team, and ended up very much enjoying it. I was able to do large quantities of software development (a happy surprise), and was very fond of my teammates and leaders. After nearly a year in the role, I thought back to my first month.

I wasn't wrong to be angry. It turns out my experience was far from unique, and many other Forward Deployed Engineers experienced the same pain and sense of betrayal. However, there was a crucial realization. I was _too_ moved. My actual foundation felt shaken. Why? In short, my ability as a software engineer had become a counterfeit god. When I realized I might lose this ability (or at least temporarily be unable to grow it), when I thought my ability as a software engineer might be taken away, I was rocked. How deeply I was affected by the _fear_ of not being able to continue as a software engineer revealed the presence of an idol. I idolized my work. From it, I drew a sense of value. It had become, foremost, _who_ I was. If my identity was a represented by a deck of cards, in order of importance, the top card had become "Software Engineer".

Oh, what an evil for a Christian. To think they are, chiefly, anything but a child of God. 

When the ordering of our identities, as Christians, is skewed, there is no result except to feel like a hamster on a wheel; seeking value and worth from something (anything) which _cannot_ ultimately grant it. Professional success and accomplishment is fickle, fallible, and often an ever-moving goalpost. You can pursue it, and likely taste some success, but will be left chasing the next level of achievement indefinitely. Romantic relationships occur between people, who are marred by sin. Consequently, even a relationship with your "soul mate" will be incomplete in its satisfaction. There is much to be said on the subject of where humans tend to find their identities (and why those places cannot, in the end, provide an unshakeable sense of worth). On the subject, I encourage you to listen to [this message by Tim Keller on identity](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ehw87PqTwKw). The point of all this reasoning is to say, as I reflected on my first month as a Forward Deployed Engineer, I recalled Keller's teaching, and I experienced an "Aha!" moment. The idol was made plain. Why had I felt so shaken, so unsettled, so _disturbed_? It was because my foundation, from which I derived my foremost sense of value, was a foundation that _could_ be challenged. Which, if you follow Christ, can only be true if you've placed yourself on the wrong foundation (for the foundation of who you are in Christ cannot be moved). This revelation was powerful, and revealed something incredibly interesting and wonderful about who God is.

#### The Father's Guidance Revealed
When I first landed in this new role, I was incredibly upset, and shaken to my core. Why, then, do you think God guided my wife and I to D.C., to accept this job offer? Why did he answer our prayers with whisperings of the spirit, and wisdom from our trusted advisors, both saying, "Go." It was, at least in part (though I'm confident not in whole), to reveal an idol of my heart. The counterfeit god of vocational success. How else could this idol have been revealed, except by taking it away? Would I have accepted this job offer knowing it wasn't exactly what I wanted to do? Of course not. I'm sure there are other ways God could have made this plain to me, but certainly this manner was effective. God's counsel, though it seemed impossible to discern in my first month as an FDE, was wise and true. Yet, and so importantly, it wasn't possible for me to see the wisdom and truth until _after_ the deed had been done. It wasn't possible to see the idol put to death until _after_ I had taken the new job and experienced the pain of my foundation giving way. In the moments when I felt most forsaken by God, he was most tenderly caring for me. He did not leave me to lean on my value as a software engineer, to continue living life striving to earn my sense of value and worth. He, as gently as could be done, opened my eyes to the idol, and gave me an opportunity to sort the deck of my identity properly.

This is but one little example, though I think an enlightening one, of the Father's guidance.