---

## What of Fear and Anxiety?
This morning I awoke, the first full night of sleep (8+ hours) this week, feeling well rested. I rolled over to say good morning to Noelle, and found her to be in quite an agitated state. We have a wedding to attend, in just four short weeks, in which I am a groomsman. Which means, with little uncertainty, I'll be unable to adhere to social distancing standards for the better part of a day. We'll need to travel out of state to get to the wedding, which also means we'll need to find somewhere to stay overnight that is not our apartment. In short, it's possible that we're exposed to the Coronavirus during the trip, and consequently a risk of death. Noelle is very aware, and such is the cause of her emotion this morning. She is not alone. Many, many people are struggling with fear and anxiety during the pandemic. For context, on today's date some cities and towns are just beginning to partially re-open.

It's difficult for me to know how to respond to this particular emotion, and to act on that knowledge. Where does anxiety come from? Where does fear come from? How ought I respond as a husband, as a Christian? Isaiah 26:3 tells us, "You keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on you, because he trusts in you." The antithesis of this verse is that if we as disciples are not experiencing peace, then we've forgotten who God is, and have lost our trust in his goodness, sovereignty, and omnipotence. To be clear, we do not have control over our emotional responses to circumstances. Our brain releases hormones into our body reflexively, based on external input, causing the experience of various emotions. If we're eye to eye with a lion with nowhere to run, we are going to experience fear (and rightly so). We do, however, have control over how we can respond to these emotions. When we feel fear in the presence of possible death (in this case, via COVID-19), we have two opportunities. First, we have the chance to make wise decisions in how we interact with the world, as to avoid risking our own lives and endangering the lives of others. We ought to make every effort, as Christians, both to love those who are hurting (physically, financially, emotionally) because of the quarantine, and to do our part in preventing the spread of the virus (especially for those at higher risk). Second, we have the opportunity to preach to ourselves the truth of our hope in Christ. Faced with death, or any kind of related suffering, what is the Truth that our worldview (relationship with the God of the Christian bible) offers us?

### He Who Dwells in the Shelter of the Most High
God makes several promises of His character, and of his relationship with us, in the bible. Psalm 91:1-2 says this, "He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High will abide in the shadow of the Almighty. I will say to the LORD, 'My refuge and my fortress, my God, in whom I trust'". The implication is relatively clear. The psalmist is asserting God is a refuge and a fortress for whomever trusts in Him. What do we know of the terms "refuge" and "fortress"? Refuge can be defined as, "a condition of being safe or sheltered from pursuit, danger, or trouble." Fortress can be defined as, "a military stronghold." Therefore, the psalmist's assertion is really this, "God will make safe those who trust in Him". It's not difficult, though, to interpret this to mean a literal protection against any physical, emotional, or financial harm. But is that true? In Luke chapter 4, we find Jesus beginning a forty day period of fasting and temptation by the devil. The devil leads Him to Jerusalem, to the top of a temple, and tells Him, "If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down from here, for it is written, 'He will command his angels concerning you, to guard you' and 'On their hands they will bear you up, lest you strike your foot against a stone.'" The verses the devil cites here are from the same psalm (verses 11 and 12) in which we just read of God's promise to make His people safe. The devil wants Jesus to believe God's promise to keep him safe actually means to protect him entirely from worldly harm.

Do you see how sinister this really is? If the devil can get a Christian to believe, "Now that I put my trust in God, nothing profoundly evil will ever happen to me again," then when bad things do happen (and they will), that person will withdraw from God. They will think (and justly so, if their interpretation of God's promise was correct), "God has forsaken his promise! He must not be as good, honest, powerful, or sovereign as I thought." If you believe that misinterpretation, there is no destination _but_ to be withdrawn from God.

So what does God's promise to be a refuge for us truly mean? Let's first consider what it cannot mean. It cannot mean we will not (forgive the double negative, it feels necessary here) suffer physical, emotional, or relational harm. Look to Christ. We are sinful beings, he was not. Yet, Christ suffered brutal physical pain, and brutal emotional/relational pain (by being separated from God in his death, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?") when he went to the cross. If our perfect example of how to live in this world suffered greatly, what ought we to expect? "Indeed, all who desire to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted," 2 Timothy 3:12, and again "Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all," Psalm 34:19. Acknowledging who you are before God, and accepting Jesus' sacrifice for you, does not mean that you won't ever suffer in this world again. Indeed, being a disciple will expose you to many kinds of suffering that you were not previously vulnerable to. Just think, before you become a Christian, your only real enemy is a God who loves you beyond imagination. After, your enemies are the world, the flesh, and the devil; forces that, in the best case, do not hold your best interests at heart, and in the worst case want to see you burn. The topic of our enemies as Christians is too deep and broad for this post, though I would encourage you to hear Tim Keller's message on [Spiritual Warfare](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JcPlfM7w-ZE) for the Truth of the matter. So, if we are bound to suffer, how are we to believe in God's promise to keep us safe, and what does it actually mean if not protection from worldly harm?

### To Sink a Man
When I was 16, I was driving (a little too quickly, I'll admit) through the parking lot at the high school I attended. As I was passing by, a Jeep on my right started backing out of a parking spot (much too quickly) and made contact with my rear bumper. It took half of the bumper off, and a little paint. I found a place to park, got the driver's information, and gave my parents a call to let them know what happened. When I told them I was in a car accident, what do you think their first question was? Something like, "Are you okay?" The concern in the moment was not for the damage to the vehicle, and the potentially expensive repairs. Why? Because, in most cases, the single most important thing in a parent's life is the life of their child. The cost of repairing a vehicle is peanuts in comparison. It's not hard to think of many more anecdotes supporting this idea. The idea is also easily extended to the concept of any "single most important treasure" in a person's life. In the presence of great financial, physical, or relational loss, a person can be at peace, and even feel relieved, as long as their most important treasure is safe. The only way to really _sink_ a person, to remove all hope and joy, is to take away that which they value above all else.

The most valuable thing a Christian possesses is his or her salvation in Christ. There is no other treasure in this world that can compare. It means a relationship with a Being who loves you more than anybody could in this world, and the promise of life eternal with Him and other Christians. Jesus says, "The kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field, which a man found and covered up. Then in his joy he goes and sells all that he has and buys that field" (Matthew 13:44). Nothing can compare to the value of this gift. To sink a Christian, to take away all of their hope and joy, would require you to be able to take it away. But, is that possible? In Romans 8:38 Paul famously writes, "For I am sure that neither death nor life, nor angels nor rulers, nor things present nor things to come, nor powers, nor height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord." It is this verse that makes clear God's promise to be our refuge. _We cannot be sunk_, and there is nothing that can be done to take away our buoyancy. That which is most valuable to us in the world, our salvation and relationship with Christ, cannot be taken from us. It is sealed, and we are spoken for. This is the Christian's power to face suffering, to never lose their hope and joy.
